In the aftermath of the fall of the Berlin wall, Fukuyama (1992) provocatively claimed that the disintegration of the Eastern bloc represented the end of history i.e, the triumph of Western liberal democracy as a universal political system and capitalism as the dominant mode of production.
This thesis was quickly challenged by many on various grounds, including by Huntington (2011) who invoked the specter of new and renewed civilizational clashes, especially around religious ideology.
Without entering into a debate on the history of ideas, what is of interest to this paper is that even Fukuyama (2002) chose to rethink his thesis when he argued that there would be no end of history as long as science and technology keep advancing. 
Further, it is the social deployment of these advances that determines trajectories of innovation and the character of our economies and societies.
Indeed, as far as economies are concerned, although capitalism is the dominant mode of production, its manifestation has changed with new technologies.
In the nearly quarter century since Fukuyama offered his thesis, capitalism is not what it was a quarter century prior to the thesis.
This difference can be attributed, in no small measure, to the effects of the commercialization of the internet at about the time that Fukuyama offered his thesis, and the proliferation of information and communication technologies (ICTs) more broadly since the 1970s.
Historically, new technologies, especially general purpose technologies such as ICTs, have unleashed innovation by not only opening up new domains of activity, but by also radically transforming the division of labor in existing domains of activity (Walker and Storper 1989).
With ICTs also being characterized by declining marginal costs of production, much hope and investments have been vested in projects deploying the technology in various ‘developmental’ domains, such as agriculture, education, governance, healthcare, poverty alleviation and sustainable livelihoods, to improve the human condition, especially in resource constrained contexts.
Although many valuable evaluations of such projects suggest that the hope and the investment in them is, at best, mixed (for example, Heeks 2003, Toyama 2015), they nevertheless indicate that ICTD is doing its bit to ensure that the end of history is not nigh.
Amidst the normative debates on the possible role for ICTD in undermining the end of history thesis however, it is ironic that the role of history is overlooked i.e., the question of how history has shaped ICTD, and given it the characteristics it possesses, is not directly answered in the literature.
There are analytical reasons why this question is important. On one hand, as institutional economics teaches us, innovation is the result of new technologies co-evolving with institutions i.e., it is endogenous and not exogenous to capitalism (Nelson and Winter, 1982).
It is path-dependent and not ahistorical.
At the same time, classical political economy, understands development “as the unfolding logic of capitalism that creates uneven geographies of accumulation” (Rangan, 2008).
As Arrighi (2009) argues, new geographies of accumulation result as capitalism has historically moved from small ‘containers’ to bigger ‘containers’ as it seeks a ‘spatial fix’ to overcome the periodic crises it faces.
This movement used to be between countries that were relatively wealthy and with low population densities.
Now, however, the movement is to large ‘civilizational states’ that have relatively poor and dense populations, such as China and India.
It is to situate ICTD as a socially, spatially and temporally specific outcome within a conjunctural configuration of long run changes in capitalism that Section 2 will trace the unfolding of three industrial revolutions.
In doing so, it will highlight technological change and innovation amidst changing institutional conditions and a quest for new markets.
It will especially emphasize how, since the late 20th century, efforts to promote free markets and international trade to propel economic growth, combined with advances in ICTs, have fostered an informational capitalism that is organized around a global economy which operates as a unit in real time on a planetary scale (Castells 2000).
Section 3 will explain why globalization, combined with demographic pressures and market saturation in the Global North,1 has made ICTD for a bottom-of-the-pyramid (BoP) market especially attractive. The BoP market refers to the market opportunity offered by an estimated 3 to 4 billion customers earning less than US$2 a day, found mostly in the Global South (Prahalad, 2004). But, despite the endogeneity of innovation to capitalism, ICTD does not mean business-as-usual. This is especially because meeting the needs of the BoP, even for technologically endowed multinational enterprises (MNEs) with deep pockets, is easier said than done as customers in the market typically have low levels of literacy and purchasing power, and are often found in regions where physical infrastructure is either unreliable or non-existent. To address these market characteristics there has been a call for new models of innovation, especially frugal innovation. Achieving frugal innovation, however, has been not been easy either without an understanding of the needs of hitherto ignored markets. While organizational practices such as open innovation and the like abound to understand users, this paper will point to emergent partnerships between MNEs and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to meet the needs of the BoP. MNEs and NGOs have been historically antagonistic and make strange bedfellows but circumstances are bringing them together: since NGOs have their ears to the ground and understand the needs of underserved users, they can provide insights that MNEs find hard to get otherwise, while the technical capabilities of the MNEs allow the NGOs to better service the grassroots.
Section 4 will explain why India provides a good location to understand the configuration of this particular facet of informational capitalism.
By becoming the world’s largest exporter of software services, India has established that it has the skills, at least in terms of numbers, to address the ICTD challenge.
The country is also an ideal laboratory because it has a large, socially and culturally diverse population which is poor and illiterate, and gets by with inadequate infrastructure.
More recently, legislative and policy changes have enhanced the role of NGOs.
As some NGOs have taken on new roles, they have also become more attractive partners for MNEs.
Section 5 provides two cases of MNE-NGO partnerships in the domains of rural livelihoods and health, and education, before discussing the mutual benefit and tensions in the partnerships.
Section 6 will reflect on the cases and bring up the conclusions by examining the value of providing a ‘top-down’ and ‘long-run’ view of ICTD, rather than a project based ‘bottom-up’ view, and its role in the unfolding of capitalism.
SOURCE: "Beyond ICTs and developmental domains: The historical specificity of ICTD" - Balaji Parthasarathy & Yuko Aoyama